Antecedent Morph Behavior aka Adaptive Keys (#2042)
zmkfirmware/zmk: docs/docs/behaviors/antecedent-morph.md

---
title: Antecedent-Morph Behavior
sidebar_label: Antecedent-Morph
---

## Summary

> The Antecedent-Morph behavior (adaptive keys) sends different behaviors, depending on which key was most recently

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Antecedent-Morph behavior (adaptive keys) sends different behaviors depending on which key was most recently
```

released before the antecedent-morph behavior was pressed, if this occurs within a configurable time period.

## Antecedent-Morph

> The configuration of the behavior consists of an array of `antecedents`, key codes with implicit modifiers, as well as
> of a delay `max-delay-ms` in milli-seconds. If none of the `antecedents` was released during the `max-delay-ms` before
> the antecedent-morph behavior is pressed, the behavior invokes the `defaults` binding. If, however, the `n`-th of the
> key codes (with implicit modifiers) listed in the array `antecedents` was released within `max-delay-ms`, the behavior
> invokes the `n`-th of the bindings of the `bindings` property.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The configuration of the behavior consists of an array of `antecedents` which consist of keycodes including [implicit modifiers](../codes/modifiers.md#modifier-functions), as well as
a delay `max-delay-ms` in milliseconds. If none of the `antecedents` were released during the `max-delay-ms` before
the antecedent-morph behavior is pressed, the behavior invokes the `defaults` binding. If, however, the `n`-th of the
keycodes (with implicit modifiers) listed in the array `antecedents` was released within `max-delay-ms`, the behavior
invokes the `n`-th binding in the `bindings` property.
```

If the key A is assigned the behavior `&ad_a` defined as follows, for example,

```dts
/ {
    behaviors {
        ad_a: adaptive_a {
            compatible = "zmk,behavior-antecedent-morph";
            label = "ADAPTIVE_A";
            #binding-cells = <0>;
			defaults = <&kp A>;
            bindings = <&kp U>, <&kp O>;
			antecedents = <Q Z>;
			max-delay-ms = <250>;
        };
    };
};
```

then by default, pressing this key issues the key press `&kp A`. But if it is preceded within 250 milli-seconds by Q or
Z, then `&kp U` or `&kp O`, respectively, are issued instead.

### Behavior Binding

- Reference: `&ad_a`
- Parameter: None

Example:

```dts
&ad_a
```

### Behaviors

The antecedent-morph behavior can issue not only key press events, but rather arbitrary behaviors.

### Implicit Modifiers

Some special key codes can be obtained only with the help of modifiers. For example, on the U.S. International Keyboard,
the symbol Ü is obtained by holding right Alt and tapping Y. In order to issue this symbol, one can therefore use `&kp
RA(Y)`. Here, right Alt is called an *implicit modifier*. Antecedents are always considered with implicit modifiers. For
example,

> ```dts

Reviewer: Need to make sure to use 4 spaces instead of tabs consistently in examples.

/ {
    behaviors {
        ad_a: adaptive_a {
            compatible = "zmk,behavior-antecedent-morph";
            label = "ADAPTIVE_A";
            #binding-cells = <0>;
			defaults = <&kp A>;
            bindings = <&kp U>, <&kp O>;
			antecedents = <RA(Y) Z>;
			max-delay-ms = <250>;
        };
    };
};
```

replaces the A by a U if preceded by Ü, but not if preceded by Y.

### Explicit Modifiers

> The entire function of the antecedent-morph behavior is independent of the *explicit modifiers*. These are the modifiers

Reviewer: I feel that this can also go into a `:::note` box rather than a dedicated header.

that the user is holding down while tapping the antecedent or while pressing the antecedent-morph behavior. In the above
example, A is replaced by O if preceded by Z, regardless of which modifier keys were held down while tapping the Z,
i.e. in particular after a lower case z or after an upper case Z.

> Finally, if the user is still holding down a Shift key when pressing the A that triggers the above antecedent-morph

Reviewer: This seems rather obvious to me, but I am not strictly opposed to having it if you feel differently.

behavior, then this results in an upper case O rather than a lower case o.

> ### Dead Antecedents

Reviewer: I think this section is complicated and exposes too much of the ZMK internals for an end user. If dead keys functionality is really something that people need to be using, I would put it in a `:::tip` box where you can briefly mention using e.g. `K_CANCEL` as a dummy keycode.
